chore: update evm data structures (#401)
eth-protocol-fellows/protocol-studies: docs/wiki/EL/evm.md

We have covered **what** EVM is, let's explore **how** it works.

> # EVM Data Storage

Author: agreed! updated

The EVM has four main places to store data during execution:
- **Stack**
- **Memory**
- **Storage**
- **Calldata**

Let's explore each of these data stores more in depth.

## Stack

Stack is a simple data structure with two operations: **PUSH** and **POP**. Push adds an item to top of the stack, while pop removes the top-most item. Stack operates on Last-In-First-Out (LIFO) principle - the last element added is the first removed. If you try to pop from an empty stack, a **stack underflow error** occurs.

Since the stack is where most opcodes operate, it is responsible for holding the values used to read from and write to **memory** and **storage**, which we'll detail later.

> The primary utility of the stack by the EVM is to store intermediate values in computations.

Author: added this too, good clarification

![EVM stack](../../images/evm/stack.gif)

> > The EVM stack has a maximum size of 1024 items consisting of 32 bytes each and is reset after each contract execution. Only the top 16 items are easily accessible. If you run out of stack, the contract execution will fail.

Author: Great idea to add some descriptions of DUP/SWAP. I threw some info in from the yellow paper

- **Stack**
- **Memory**
- **Storage**
- **Calldata**

Let's explore each of these data stores more in depth.

## Stack

Stack is a simple data structure with two operations: **PUSH** and **POP**. Push adds an item to top of the stack, while pop removes the top-most item. Stack operates on Last-In-First-Out (LIFO) principle - the last element added is the first removed. If you try to pop from an empty stack, a **stack underflow error** occurs.

Since the stack is where most opcodes operate, it is responsible for holding the values used to read from and write to **memory** and **storage**, which we'll detail later.

The primary utility of the stack by the EVM is to store intermediate values in computations and to supply arguments to opcodes.

![EVM stack](../../images/evm/stack.gif)

> The EVM stack has a maximum size of 1024 items consisting of 32 bytes each and is reset after each contract execution. Only the top 16 items are accessible. If you run out of stack, the contract execution will fail.

The reason behind this 16 item stack size is due to the **DUP** and **SWAP** opcodes.

- **DUPn**: Duplicate nth stack item to top.
- **SWAPn**: Swap top with n+1th stack item.

> The max `n` in the **DUP** and **SWAP** opcodes is 16, As mentioned, the EVM only allows single byte opcodes. In the case of **DUP** and **SWAP**, the byte is split into two 4 bit values called nibbles. The lower nibble specifies the value on the stack to swap or duplicate and is limited to 16 due to only being 4 bits in length, hence a max of **DUP16** and **SWAP16**.

Reviewer: > The max `n` in the **DUP** and **SWAP** opcodes is 16, As mentioned, the EVM only allows single byte opcodes. In the case of **DUP** and **SWAP**, the byte is split into two 4 bit values called nibbles. The lower nibble specifies the value on the stack to swap or duplicate and is limited to 16 due to only being 4 bits in length, hence a max of **DUP16** and **SWAP16**.

I'm not sure if the DUP/SWAP opcodes are bounded by this design. I always thought of them as  simple opcode s assigned to arbitrary value like PUSH*. 

cc: @chfast

Reviewer 2: The nybble split is one way to frame it, but not essential. Both framings are valid.  Many clients drop DUP/SWAP/PUSH into one section of code and they take the last 4/5 bits to determine the size of the swap/dup/push.  But it may be easier in ZK to treat them all as unique.

Author: @shemnon, I see what you're saying. The lower nibble utilization is more of a client specific implementation. How about rewording this section to something like this to keep it simple and evm specific:
"The maximum n for DUP and SWAP is 16, corresponding to opcodes 0x80–0x8f and 0x90–0x9f respectively. These opcodes are explicitly defined in the EVM and form a fixed set — making the 16-item limit an EVM-level constraint."
cc @raxhvl

Reviewer: @shane-moore That sounds great!

![EVM Memory](../../images/evm/evm-memory.gif)

> Unlike stack, which provides data to individual instructions, memory stores ephemeral data that is relevant to the entire program.  This data often includes return data and dynamic types such as arrays that will be mutated during the contract function execution.

Author: agreed, better to describe more generally the differences of the data structures between memory and stack. I added this sentence, "Since the stack has a hard limit of one word slots, **memory** supplements the stack by allowing indexed access to arbitrarily sized data. Stack values can be stored to or loaded from **memory** on demand."

> EVM memory is shown as blocks of 32 bytes to illustrate how memory expansion works. In reality, it is a seamless sequence of bytes, without any inherent divisions or blocks.

## Calldata

> The **calldata** memory type is very similar to **Memory** as discussed above in that they both store dynamically sized data that is removed after contract execution. However, the **calldata** memory structure stores read-only data originating from a function's parameters.  The EVM will store the parameter as calldata since it's cheaper than copying the value to **Memory**.

Author: @raxhvl, thanks for all this clarification bud. Reworded this section to make it quite clear that calldata is read-only input data: "The **calldata** is read-only input data passed to the EVM via message call instructions or from a transaction and is stored as a sequence of bytes that are accessible via specific opcodes."

###  Reading from calldata

> If the transaction calling this smart contract passes in calldata, the inputted data can be loaded using the `CALLDATALOAD` opcode, which reads 32 bytes from calldata at a given offset and pushes it onto the stack once the program counter reaches its position in the bytecode. More info on the `CALLDATALOAD` opcode can be found [here](https://veridelisi.medium.com/learn-evm-opcodes-v-a59dc7cbf9c9).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The calldata for the current environment can be accessed using either:
-  `CALLDATALOAD` opcode which reads 32 bytes from a desired offset onto the stack, [learn more](https://veridelisi.medium.com/learn-evm-opcodes-v-a59dc7cbf9c9).
- or, using `CALLDATACOPY` to copy a portion of calldata to memory.
```
The previous comment discusses how calldata is initialized (tx or message call) so its suffice to discuss how to read from it.

Author: @raxhvl, for sure! reworded as you suggest above

Additional opcodes for **calldata** include:
- `CALLDATASIZE`: Puts a number onto the stack, where that number is the number of bytes in calldata.
- `CALLDATACOPY`: Copies a segment of calldata to memory and takes three stack arguments: destination memory offset, calldata offset, and length in bytes.

## Storage

> Storage is designed as a **word-addressed word array**. Unlike memory, storage is associated with an Ethereum account and is **persisted** across transactions as part of the world state.  It can be thought of as the **database** associated with the smart contract, which is why it contains the contract's "state" variables. Storage size is fixed at 2^256 slots, 32 bytes each.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Storage is designed as a **word-addressed word array**. Unlike memory, storage is associated with an Ethereum account and is **persisted** across transactions as part of the world state.  It can be thought of as a   key-value **database** associated with the smart contract, which is why it contains the contract's "state" variables. Storage size is fixed at 2^256 slots, 32 bytes each.
```

![EVM Storage](../../images/evm/evm-storage.jpg)

Storage can only be accessed via the code of its associated account. External accounts don't have code and therefore cannot access their own storage.

## Writing to storage

> `SSTORE` takes two values from the stack: a storage **slot** and a 32-byte **value**. It then writes the value to storage of the account.  Notice: Slots can be thought of as the basic unit of storage, so when writing to storage, we deal with slots as opposed to individual bytes.  Depending upon the data type being stored, the value will take up a full slot or could be combined with other data in the same slot if the their combined length is less than 32 bytes long. More info on how different data types are packed into slots can be found [here](https://medium.com/coinmonks/solidity-storage-how-does-it-work-8354afde3eb).

Reviewer: > Depending upon the data type being stored, the value will take up a full slot or could be combined with other data in the same slot if the their combined length is less than 32 bytes long. More info on how different data types are packed into slots can be found [here](https://medium.com/coinmonks/solidity-storage-how-does-it-work-8354afde3eb).

EVM writes exactly 32 bytes to storage. You could reframe this to say:

Writing to storage is expensive. High-level languages like Solidity optimize storage by packing multiple variables into a single 32-byte slot when their combined size is less than or equal to 32 bytes.

Again, this has to do with Solidity than EVM.
